.TH NFS-CACHEFS 8 "2026-05" "nfs-cachefs" "System Manager's Manual"
.SH NAME
nfs-cachefs \- userspace daemon for Linux fscache + cachefiles (traditional mode)
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B nfs-cachefs
[\fB\-\-config\fR \fIPATH\fR]
[\fB\-\-log-level\fR \fILEVEL\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B nfs-cachefs
is a modern Rust replacement for the upstream
.BR cachefilesd (8)
daemon. It opens
.I /dev/cachefiles ,
configures the kernel
.B cachefiles
backend, and drives cache culling by deleting LRU objects when the cache
filesystem approaches its
.B bcull
or
.B fcull
thresholds.

The daemon does not handle cache hits or misses on the data path \(em that
is done entirely by the kernel
.BR cachefiles.ko
module. NFS clients mounted with
.B \-o\ fsc
will transparently populate and read from the local cache filesystem
configured here.

This implementation supports the traditional userspace protocol only.
On-demand mode (kernel \(>=\ 5.19,
.BR CONFIG_CACHEFILES_ONDEMAND ) is not supported by this binary; on
distributions that ship with
.B CONFIG_CACHEFILES_ONDEMAND=n
(e.g. Ubuntu 24.04) only the traditional mode is available anyway.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB\-c\fR, \fB\-\-config\fR \fIPATH\fR
TOML configuration file. Default:
.IR /etc/nfs-cachefs/daemon.toml .
.TP
\fB\-\-log-level\fR \fILEVEL\fR
Override log level (\fIerror\fR, \fIwarn\fR, \fIinfo\fR, \fIdebug\fR,
\fItrace\fR). The
.B RUST_LOG
environment variable takes precedence if set.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/nfs-cachefs/daemon.toml
Configuration file. See the comments in the shipped default for the
schema.
.TP
.I /dev/cachefiles
Kernel control device.
.TP
.I /proc/fs/fscache/stats
Real-time fscache counters; useful for monitoring cache hit rates.
.TP
.I /proc/fs/fscache/caches
Lists active caches; the daemon's
.B tag
appears here.
.TP
.I /proc/fs/nfsfs/volumes
Lists NFS mounts; the
.B FSC
column shows which mounts have caching enabled.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B RUST_LOG
Tracing-subscriber filter directive.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR cachefilesd (8),
.BR mount.nfs (8)
.PP
.B Documentation/filesystems/caching/cachefiles.rst
in the Linux kernel source.
.SH AUTHORS
nfs-cachefs is licensed under the MIT license.
